Free Software and progressive development: towards an epistemology of software for a learning society
=====================================================================================================

This article presents an overview of the role played by the four essential
freedoms of Free Software (FSF 2012) in the emergence of *progressive
development*, through the case study of code development metrics (data on git
operations such as clone, branch, commit, tag, merge and on code
authorship/reviews/signoffs) on a selected set of free software projects on the
code hosting service github.com.

We define *progressive development* as a dual-faced concept: on one side, the
building of increasingly capable software systems, where the freedom to study
and use previous code and software engineering methods allows developers to
avoid duplication of effort and empowers them to learn from past successes and
mistakes; on the other side, development is seen in the wider context of human
capabilities analysis, in societies which are heavily dependent on computer
code, from the running of essential infrastructure to the addressing of
individual communication, information and leisure requests.

Departing from the more established lines of analysis of Free Software in the
context of *software production*, we focus on the role of Free Software licenses
and the related four essential freedoms as enablers of *distribution* of code
unhindered by restrictions and therefore conducive to lower friction in further
development. Thanks to the efficient distributed code development features
provided by the software configuration management tool *git* and the interface
provided by the github.com service, developers are empowered to work on personal
clones of any free software project hosted on github.com, using a variety of
development strategies ranging from feature branches meant to be integrated
with the main development branch to totally independent clones whose new
features or improved code are never contributed back to the original project,
but are still available for others to study and build upon (hence the
*progressive* character of development).

We employ code metrics analysis derived from earlier digital archeology work
(MOCKUS 2002) to trace connections between clones of software repositories and
to describe a range of development models enabled by free software licenses and
efficient code cloning and merging, focusing on the freedom to perform
progressive development, beyond the models of peer production traditionally
associated with free/open source/libre software development.

Finally, we review the findings of the case study, critically assessing whether
this more nuanced understanding of development practices can better address the
desired consonance between development of capabilities for individuals, groups
and organizations involved in knowledge sharing in a learning society that
builds upon past experience, on one side, and the software systems that run
essential infrastructure for these actors on the other side, hence making Free
Software essentially a practice of freedom that negates the negation of free
development represented by non-free (or proprietary) software.


[FSF 2012] Free Software Foundation, Free Software Definition v1.111, retrieved
on 20 Jul 2012 (http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html).

[MOCKUS 2002] Audris Mockus, Roy T. Fielding, and James Herbsleb. Two case
studies of open source software development: Apache and Mozilla. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 11(3):1-38, July 2002. 